New Sphinx tutorial, part III (#9534)
sphinx-doc/sphinx: doc/tutorial/describing-code.rst

Describing code in Sphinx
=========================

In the :doc:`previous sections of the tutorial </tutorial/index>` you can read
how to write narrative or prose documentation in Sphinx. In this section you
will describe code objects instead.

.. _tutorial-describing-objects:

Documenting Python objects
--------------------------

Sphinx offers several roles and directives to document Python objects,
all grouped together in the Python

> :doc:`domain </usage/restructuredtext/domains>`. For example, you can

Reviewer: How about linking "The Python Domain" instead of the domain page?
https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/domains.html#the-python-domain

Author: Changed! 👍🏽

use the :rst:dir:`py:function` directive to document a Python function,
as follows:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   Creating recipes
   ----------------

   To retrieve a list of random ingredients,
   you can use the ``lumache.get_random_ingredients()`` function:

   .. py:function:: lumache.get_random_ingredients([kind=None])

      Return a list of random ingredients as strings.

      :param kind: Optional "kind" of ingredients.
      :type kind: list[str] or None
      :return: The ingredients list.
      :rtype: list[str]

Which will render like this:

.. figure:: /_static/tutorial/lumache-py-function.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: HTML result of documenting a Python function in Sphinx

>    HTML result of documenting a Python function in Sphinx

Reviewer 2: nit: I'd avoid using "HTML result" since this is not the HTML, but the rendered version 😄 

```suggestion
   The rendered result of documenting a Python function in Sphinx
```

Author: ![treachery](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/316517/132354487-92db73cf-b790-4e43-86e5-bae2ea3be5c8.jpg)

Notice several things:

- Sphinx parsed the argument of the ``.. py:function`` directive and
  highlighted the module, the function name, and the parameters appropriately.
- Putting a parameter inside square brackets is a convention that conveys it is
  optional. This syntax is not mandatory but can be useful for readers.
- The directive content includes a one-line description of the function,

>   as well as a :ref:`field list <rst-field-lists>` containing the function

Reviewer: A field list inside some domain directive is considered as a special one. It's called "info-field-lists". So it would be better to link here instead of rst-field-lists.
https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/domains.html#info-field-lists

Author: Good point! Will change it

  parameter, its expected type, the return value, and the return type.

.. note::

   The ``py:`` prefix specifies the :term:`domain`. You may configure the
   default domain so you can omit the prefix, either globally using the
   :confval:`primary_domain` configuration, or per-file using the

>    :rst:dir:`default-domain` directive.

Reviewer: FYI: The `default-domain` directive only changes the default domain between where it called and the end of the file (or another call). In other words, it does not change the domain above where it is called. I hope "per-file" will not confuse readers.

Author: Thanks, will rephrase that part

   ``.. function::`` directly.

Cross-referencing Python objects
--------------------------------

By default, most of these directives generate entities that can be
cross-referenced from any part of the documentation by using
:ref:`a corresponding role <python-roles>`. For the case of functions,
you can use :rst:role:`py:func` for that, as follows:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   The ``kind`` parameter should be either ``"meat"``, ``"fish"``,
   or ``"veggies"``. Otherwise, :py:func:`lumache.get_random_ingredients`
   will raise an exception.

When generating code documentation, Sphinx will generate a cross-reference automatically just
by using the name of the object, without you having to explicitly use a role
for that. For example, you can describe the custom exception raised by the
function using the :rst:dir:`py:exception` directive:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   .. py:exception:: lumache.InvalidKindError

      Raised if the kind is invalid.

Then, add this exception to the original description of the function:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst
   :emphasize-lines: 7

>    .. py:function:: lumache.get_random_ingredients([kind=None])

Reviewer: Are square brackets needed? They prevent parsing the arguments. So I'd not like to recommend to use.

Author: I saw it in the wild and considered including it, but I didn't know it prevents parsing the arguments. I'll rephrase this part (and change the screenshots, sigh)

One of the ways to do that in Sphinx is to include code snippets in the
documentation, called *doctests*, that are executed when the documentation is
built.

To demonstrate doctests and other Sphinx features covered in this tutorial,
Sphinx will need to be able to import the code. To achieve that, write this
at the beginning of ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: docs/source/conf.py
   :emphasize-lines: 3-5

   # If extensions (or modules to document with autodoc) are in another directory,
   # add these directories to sys.path here.
   import pathlib
   import sys
   sys.path.insert(0, pathlib.Path(__file__).parents[2].resolve().as_posix())

.. note::

   An alternative to changing the :py:data:`sys.path` variable is to create a
   ``pyproject.toml`` file and make the code installable,
   so it behaves like any other Python library. However, the ``sys.path``
   approach is simpler.

Then, before adding doctests to your documentation, enable the
:doc:`doctest </usage/extensions/doctest>` extension in ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: docs/source/conf.py
   :emphasize-lines: 3

   extensions = [

>        'sphinx.ext.duration',

Reviewer: Why duration needed?

       'sphinx.ext.doctest',
   ]

Next, write a doctest block as follows:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   >>> import lumache
   >>> lumache.get_random_ingredients()
   ['shells', 'gorgonzola', 'parsley']

Doctests include the Python instructions to be run preceded by ``>>>``,
the standard Python interpreter prompt, as well as the expected output
of each instruction. This way, Sphinx can check whether the actual output
matches the expected one.

To observe how a doctest failure looks like (rather than a code error as
above), let's write the return value incorrectly first. Therefore, add a
function ``get_random_ingredients`` like this:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: lumache.py

   def get_random_ingredients():
       return ["eggs", "bacon", "spam"]

You can now run ``make doctest`` to execute the doctests of your documentation.
Initially this will display an error, since the actual code does not behave
as specified:

.. code-block:: console

   (.venv) $ make doctest

>    Running Sphinx v4.2.0+

Reviewer: It might be better to use one of the released versions.

Author: Oops, I was using my development installation. Will change this console output and use a stable version going forward.

Describing code in Sphinx
=========================

In the previous sections of the tutorial you can read how to write narrative

> or prose documentation in Sphinx. In this section you will describe code

Reviewer 3: Should this link to the previous section? Perhaps to the TOC?

Author: Good idea, will do

all grouped together in the Python
:doc:`domain </usage/restructuredtext/domains>`. For example, you can
use the :rst:dir:`py:function` directive to document a Python function,
as follows:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   Creating recipes
   ----------------

   To retrieve a list of random ingredients,
   you can use the ``lumache.get_random_ingredients()`` function:

   .. py:function:: lumache.get_random_ingredients([kind=None])

      Return a list of random ingredients as strings.

      :param kind: Optional "kind" of ingredients.
      :type kind: list[str] or None
      :return: The ingredients list.
      :rtype: list[str]

Which will render like this:

.. figure:: /_static/tutorial/lumache-py-function.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: HTML result of documenting a Python function in Sphinx

   HTML result of documenting a Python function in Sphinx

Notice several things:

- Sphinx parsed the argument of the ``.. py:function`` directive and
  highlighted the module, the function name, and the parameters appropriately.
- Putting a parameter inside square brackets usually conveys that it is

>   optional (although it is not mandatory to use this syntax).

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a bit odd. `usually` and `not mandatory` make me not quite sure what to take away. Should I do this? 
```suggestion
- Putting a parameter inside square brackets is a convention conveys that it is
  optional. This syntax is not mandatory, but can be useful for readers.
```

Author: Thanks, committing it locally to fix a typo

- The directive content includes a one-line description of the function,
  as well as a :ref:`field list <rst-field-lists>` containing the function
  parameter, its expected type, the return value, and the return type.

.. note::

>    Since Python is the default :term:`domain`, you can write

Reviewer 3: Isn't this configurable? 

* https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/domains.html#directive-default-domain
* https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-primary_domain

I'd note usage of the directive & setting, instead of that Python is always default.

Author: Good idea, will change it

   ``.. function::`` directly without having to prefix the directive with
   ``py:``.

Cross-referencing Python objects
--------------------------------

By default, most of these directives generate entities that can be
cross-referenced from any part of the documentation by using
:ref:`a corresponding role <python-roles>`. For the case of functions,
you can use :rst:role:`py:func` for that, as follows:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   The ``kind`` parameter should be either ``"meat"``, ``"fish"``,
   or ``"veggies"``. Otherwise, :py:func:`lumache.get_random_ingredients`
   will raise an exception.

> In some contexts, Sphinx will generate a cross-reference automatically just

Reviewer 3: What contexts? Can we be more specific here? I know we're showing an example, but I think it's useful to be explicit if we can.

```suggestion
When generating code documentation, Sphinx will generate a cross-reference automatically just
```

Author: 👍🏽

by using the name of the object, without you having to explicitly use a role
for that. For example, you can describe the custom exception raised by the
function using the :rst:dir:`py:exception` directive:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   .. py:exception:: lumache.InvalidKindError

      Raised if the kind is invalid.

Then, add this exception to the original description of the function:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst
   :emphasize-lines: 7

   .. py:function:: lumache.get_random_ingredients([kind=None])

      Return a list of random ingredients as strings.

      :param kind: Optional "kind" of ingredients.
      :type kind: list[str] or None
      :raise lumache.InvalidKindError: If the kind is invalid.
      :return: The ingredients list.
      :rtype: list[str]

> And finally, this is how the result would look like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And finally, this is how the result would look:
```

Since you are now describing code from a Python library, it will become useful
to keep both the documentation and the code as synchronized as possible.
One of the ways to do that in Sphinx is to include code snippets in the
documentation, called *doctests*, that are executed when the documentation is
built.

To demonstrate doctests and other Sphinx features covered in this tutorial,
you will need to setup some basic Python infrastructure first.

Preparing the Python library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Begin by activating the virtual environment (as seen in the :ref:`getting
started <tutorial-getting-started>` section of the tutorial) and install
`flit <https://pypi.org/project/flit/>`_ on it:

.. code-block:: console

   $ source .venv/bin/activate
   (.venv) $ python -m pip install "flit~=3.3"

Next, create two files on the same level as ``README.rst``: ``pyproject.toml``
and ``lumache.py``, with these contents:

.. code-block:: toml
   :caption: pyproject.toml

   [build-system]
   requires = ["flit_core >=3.2,<4"]
   build-backend = "flit_core.buildapi"

   [project]
   name = "lumache"
   authors = [{name = "Graziella", email = "graziella@lumache"}]

>    dynamic = ["version", "description"]

Reviewer 3: This seems incredibly complex for a Sphinx tutorial. Do we actually need to install it? Can't we just import the file dynamically?

Author: We can do the `sys.path` approach instead, as you suggested below. Not super happy with it but you're right that this adds some complexity that most readers won't need.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: lumache.py

   """
   Lumache - Python library for cooks and food lovers.
   """

   __version__ = "0.1.0"

And finally, install your own code and check that importing it works:

.. code-block:: console

   (.venv) $ flit install --symlink
   ...
   (.venv) $ python -c 'import lumache; print("OK!")'
   OK!

Congratulations! You have created a basic Python library.

.. note::

   The ``pyproject.toml`` file you created above is required so that
   your library can be installed. On the other hand,
   ``flit install --symlink`` is an alternative to ``pip install .``
   that removes the need to reinstall the library every time you make

>    a change, which is convenient.

Reviewer 3: Isn't that what `pip install -e` does? I've never used flit, and don't think we should be adding external dependencies.

Author: Yes* But `-e` only works with setuptools, [until flit implements PEP 660](https://github.com/takluyver/flit/pull/400), which [standardizes editable installs across build backends](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0660/).

   An alternative is to not create ``pyproject.toml`` at all,
   and setting the :envvar:`PYTHONPATH`, :py:data:`sys.path`, or

>    equivalent. However, the ``pyproject.toml`` approach is more robust.

Reviewer 3: I feel like the sys.path approach is more appropriate for a tutorial. That pyproject.toml file is super scary.

Author: Fair enough, will simplify this part.

Adding some doctests to the documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To add doctests to your documentation, first enable the
:doc:`doctest </usage/extensions/doctest>` extension in ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: docs/source/conf.py
   :emphasize-lines: 3

   extensions = [
       'sphinx.ext.duration',
       'sphinx.ext.doctest',
   ]

Then, write a doctest block as follows:

.. code-block:: rst
   :caption: docs/source/usage.rst

   >>> import lumache
   >>> lumache.get_random_ingredients()

>    ['shells', 'gorgonzola', 'parsley']

Reviewer 3: We should explain the doctest syntax at least. We are just dropping the code here without explaining what it does, which seems confusing.

Author: True, I was blind to the fact that not all readers will understand the `>>>` prompt marks.

You can now run ``make doctest`` to execute the doctests of your documentation.
However, initially this will display an error, since the actual code does not

> exist yet:

Reviewer 3: I'd probably skip failing the tests twice. I'd just put the initial wrong implementation in the file for the user to copy originally. I thought it was weird to have the file with just a version, and that solves this problem.

Author: 👍🏽

   1 passed and 1 failed.
   ***Test Failed*** 1 failures.

   Doctest summary
   ===============
       2 tests
       1 failure in tests
       0 failures in setup code
       0 failures in cleanup code
   build finished with problems.
   make: *** [Makefile:20: doctest] Error 1

Therefore, you will need to make adjustments to your ``lumache.py``. To observe
how a doctest failure looks like (rather than a code error as above), let's
write the return value incorrectly first. Therefore, add a function
``get_random_ingredients`` like this:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: lumache.py

   def get_random_ingredients():
       return ["eggs", "bacon", "spam"]

Now ``make doctest`` will give an output similar to this:

.. code-block:: console

   (.venv) $ make doctest
   Running Sphinx v4.2.0+
   loading pickled environment... done
   ...
   running tests...

   Document: usage
   ---------------
   **********************************************************************
   File "usage.rst", line 44, in default
   Failed example:
       lumache.get_random_ingredients()
   Expected:
       ['shells', 'gorgonzola', 'parsley']
   Got:
       ['eggs', 'bacon', 'spam']

>    **********************************************************************

Reviewer 3: I'd probably crop this output. I don't know if the whole thing is useful, when we're only highlighting a small subset.

Author: 👍🏽

   1 items had failures:
      1 of   2 in default
   2 tests in 1 items.
   1 passed and 1 failed.
   ***Test Failed*** 1 failures.

   Doctest summary
   ===============
       2 tests
       1 failure in tests
       0 failures in setup code
       0 failures in cleanup code
   build finished with problems.
   make: *** [Makefile:20: doctest] Error 1

As you can see, doctest reports the expected and the actual results,
for easy examination. It is now time to fix the function:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: lumache.py
   :emphasize-lines: 2

   def get_random_ingredients():
       return ["shells", "gorgonzola", "parsley"]

> And finally, ``make test`` reports success!

Reviewer 3: Where does the user go from here? We should probably link to the next step of the tutorial, and explain what the next steps are.

Author: Yeah, I was thinking about it when I splitted the tutorial in #9540, but didn't want to make any changes to the content. Will modify all the endings.
